[Music]
okay hello everyone and welcome to the
latest explore livestream in the rather
fun new surroundings of the hive here at
se business school so I am dr. Tom
Crawford
I teach maths here at the University and
I posted the last three or four of these
if you haven't seen them totally check
them out they were awesome not just
because I'm in them you know the
questions are really cool
and the big question I'm going to do
today for you all is is school the best
place to learn now as I said we're in
this new surrounding of the hive which
means that you have various screens open
on your computers so we can see all of
your names up here on this giant wall in
front of us we can't see you so don't
worry all the webcams have been turned
off but we can't see your names and so
when you send us questions as well
they're gonna pop up at the side of the
screen so please do send in your
questions during the live stream and the
best question will receive a prize the
most thought-provoking question I should
say not the best the most
thought-provoking question will receive
a prize and you have until 4 p.m. today
to send those questions in so send them
in on the chat during the broadcast and
then you can also send them in on social
media which is at let's explore I think
Twitter Instagram and I'm gonna say
Facebook right so we better meet the
panel you're gonna be discussing is
school the best place to learn so we
will kick off with Sean so Sean do you
want to introduce yourself to our
audience hi I'm dr. Sean Paley and I
teach modern British history here at
Oxford and I'm interested in how schools
have changed over time so would I be
right in saying using the what's
happened in the past we can learn about
the role of schools and perhaps think
about what role that has played in
learning is that sort of so you know
historical and learning from the past
those kind of things
questions should be coming your way yeah
absolutely
okay fab right Brooke hello my name is
Bruce Johnson and I'm a geologist here
in the Department of Earth Sciences and
at teddy Hall or say Edmonds Hall if you
be in fancy I teach students how to read
rocks and extract the story of the Earth
from them in a variety of different
places outside of classrooms awesome so
reading rocks I'm instantly at rege by
this and I noticed you have rocks
so can we die right ed can you read a
rock forever for the audience okay so
this rock is a 1.3 billion year old
bacterial colony that we found in
northern Australia it was one and a half
kilometers underground and from reading
this rock we can tell that the earth was
covered by shallow tropical seas average
temperature was about 30 degrees which
is about twice as hot as it is now even
with climate change and it was very
little oxygen in the atmosphere and
there was a lot of iron in the ocean and
the bacteria that made this little bit
of rock as their home absolutely loved
it they were having a great time
conversely we come to a secret location
not too far away from here about 200
million years ago and you find things
like this tail born from an ichthyosaur
so a swimming reptile this one was quite
small it was only about as big as me
some of them were about as big as bosses
so from reading rocks we can understand
how the earth has changed over the
course of its of its life amazing
I'm glad I asked about how do you read
rocks because that was super cool
especially the dinosaur right thank you
very much Brooke so so I guess Brooke is
thinking here about learning outside of
the classroom so different styles and
different techniques of learning any
questions coming your way okay right
Susie hi I'm Susie Davis I've just
finished a PhD in education at the
University of Oxford and I currently
work on a project to support raising
achievement in schools in the northwest
and I'm based in
undergraduate admissions and outreach so
it would be fair to say that you
actually study how we learn so any
questions at all yes and I do wish I had
some nice rocks to bring as well to
illustrate that but yes so I studied
learning from the perspective of young
people but also teachers as well so okay
so teachers he's got any questions from
teachers Susie Susie is your woman right
awesome thank you very much everybody so
to kick things off we have a very
exciting picture round feel like I'm on
a game show so the picture round is
gonna happen so first of all is good
I've got to go so here is my image
hopefully you can all see this I'm gonna
say this is me wearing a toga but really
we all know it's a bedsheet and the
reason I wanted to present this image
based on this question of is school the
best place to learn is this is me
performing at a science festival and
doing a talk about ancient Greek
mathematicians now instead of just
teaching and introducing the concepts
and they're the mathematicians from
ancient Greece you know I'm trying to
add an art of performance to this and
really tell the stories and so for me a
lot of what I do is going out to
festivals and also into schools and
trying to to sort of bring the learning
to life so very different perhaps to
what you would expect from a normal
school lesson or perhaps what you're
used to from a normal school lesson and
so for me one of the best ways I think
to learn is by going to two events into
performances and sort of really bringing
to life what it is that you're learning
about which is hopefully captured by
this photo this is also I should clarify
this is a completely accidental photo so
my phone my mum took this and I'm not
meant to be doing this pose this was
just during the talk and it just
captured it I think quite perfect I like
I'm about to like go into song and dance
so right that is my contribution to
pitch around so I think Shawn you're
gonna go next so what have you brought
for us yes so my picture is a historical
picture
so this is a school about the time that
Queen Victoria came to the throne and
what I think's really interesting about
it if that looks nothing like a school
as we might think of it today for a
start it's what we call a dame school
and the Dame is the older lady who may
have known almost nothing more and the
children she was teaching secondly it in
her living room it's not in a school at
all that's her living room and thirdly
there are hardly any books and so this
was a sort of education but it's really
fundamentally different to what we think
of as education today but this was an
actual school yes that was an actual
school and it was thought to be a good
school so this was thought to be
something which you'd admire as a good
place to learn Wow so then I guess you
mention you touched on a few things
there about the lack of books are there
any other ways that the the role of
school has changed over time yeah quite
a lot so I said write many books also
most for children at school wouldn't
have learned how to write they've only
learnt how to read they almost certainly
wouldn't have known how to count at all
and they definitely wouldn't have learnt
subjects like geography or history or
French or any of these other subjects
and I'm also really young all of these
children would stop going to school and
they're perhaps most nine or ten years
old so there was no secondary schooling
that would have meant that bed kept on
in school until they are 18 Wow okay and
and in a living room okay
fantastic right picture number three
this is gonna be your one Brooke yes
that looks like you brought Brooke where
are you what's going on so here I am in
about two kilometres above sea level in
the Canadian Rockies in Northwest Canada
and I'm a very well famous site called
fossil Ridge and I'm holding a fossil of
a creature like this it's called a
trilobite these to be them one of the
most common organisms on earth you'd
find them everywhere this one's from the
a Birmingham from Dudley and but they
went extinct a long time ago and the one
I'm holding there is about half a
billion years old and the top of this
mountain
used to be the bottom of the sea a long
long time ago when Northwest Canada was
on the equator and so what I'm doing
here is I'm learning about the ancient
seabed and the ancient sea life when I'm
teaching about the ancient seabed and
sea life and to really understand earth
processes and how the world how busy how
the planet works and and to get immersed
in the story of how the world has
developed over these billions of years
the best way to do that is to go out to
these places and get your hands on them
so I'm actually stood on a half a
billion year old seabed there what's
really special about this place is it's
not just the hard parts that get
preserved it's it's the soft squishy
bits as well which is really rare so I
could also see what that trilobite had
eaten for dinner just before it died I
really liked clams mm-hmm and so that's
really the best way to do this because
we can look at the mountains around us
and understand how the seabed got lifted
up from below the sea to 2,000 meters
above sea level and it was also just
like a really cool place to go and visit
and and see saw some bears and some
really really grumpy good okay awesome
so just to follow up on that you won't
you you mentioned you know learning
outside of the classroom now I'm
guessing you think this is this is
pretty important that we fair to say it
definitely is if you're gonna study
you're gonna study something like Earth
Sciences or things that have the kinds
of things that happen outside or in
different places then it's it's
definitely really helpful to go out to
those places and see them firsthand so
you can tell someone about how like
continents collide and fold rocks and
turning them into mountain ranges but
you don't really understand it until you
go out to one of these places and
realize that there's two kilometer high
mountain is in fact is one big fold in
the earth like that and so that's really
kind of like helps hammer that home and
being able to touch it and and because
we're geologists we like to chew the
rocks as well and sniff it smell them
lick them as well which old gives us
information about we don't just do it
because we're weird so easy to read
rocks yeah you too rocks you
yes you okay wow that is commitment to
the cause I think that is improve it to
you right now one of the things that
works you want to go I mean III
particularly I don't personally want to
go but if you're gonna come on oh go on
then right oh can you tell what am I
meant to get when I saw this rock is
this just a complete like windup you
might know it so it feels just gently
feel slightly sticky yeah okay okay yeah
it was a little bit sticky but then if
you if you stick your tongue on that one
you'll feel how it's like a smooth it
doesn't stick okay no they feel
different
they 100% feel different yeah you can
instantly they use use one of your
senses to tell the difference between
something that's born and something
that's like sediment had a sediment that
was sticky in a sediment that wasn't
sticky that sediment that sticky has
loads of holes in it so you know the
porosity of it is not to understand the
things that happened to that rock why is
this layer porous why and why is this
layer not porous well I didn't expect to
be licking rocks today okay and on that
bombshell let's go to picture number
four so Susie do you want to tell us
about your picture yes although I just
realized if anyone after us like
hundreds hundreds of years from now
found these rocks and be interesting if
they could kind of see hmm
this rock was licked the first person
you got that yeah right Susie I think I
can see what I think is a fox so please
fellows in and this is a fox that it's a
stuffed Fox from the Natural History
Museum here in Oxford and I chose this
picture I think this is a good picture
to show
how school isn't just about acquiring
new knowledge you know about people
about places and so on but it's also
about the social and the emotional side
of learning and that's one of the
benefits I suppose of going to a good
school
you're able to socialize with other
people you know talk to other people
about your learning and also importantly
the relationships between teachers and
students are quite important there and
it's not just you know just amongst the
student community and also learning
takes place not only for for young
people for students but also for
teachers and everyone is learning at the
same time learning different things
perhaps and so here I guess this picture
is illustrating how school or learning
can mean different things in different
contexts and it doesn't necessarily have
to be you know a building with different
classrooms where everyone's together a
school can mean different things awesome
thank you very much I'm assuming that's
not a real Fox it is that well-behaved
it's very yes so it's stuffed I think
yes okay so oh it's a real one but it's
okay I got two it's not alive that you
can stroked and taunt
yeah okay awesome thank you very much
Susie okay so that brings to a close the
pitch around so now this is definitely
like a game show we go into the student
poll so you guys watching are going to
vote on a question whether this is gonna
be the first of two there will be a
second one at the end which will be the
big question but we have an intermediary
question for you now now the question is
as follows and you'll be able to vote by
just clicking on your multiple choice
answer on your computer so the question
is will school as we know it exists in
100 years time and your options are yes
no and maybe but it's very likely to be
different so I'll give you about 10
seconds or so to have a vote
we will just get up the question for you
all there well as a moment so as I said
you will have these three multiple
choice options there we go so a so will
school as we know it exists in 100 years
time a yes B no and C maybe but it will
be different so please cast your votes
in true ask the audience style and we
will reveal the results and then we will
discuss the results with the panel so
I'm gonna give you a few more seconds
hopefully we've got some folks coming in
I can't tell until the results pop up so
5 4 3 2 1 and we're closing it that was
quite fun right
so the poll has ended Wow okay so nobody
thinks that school as we know it will
exist in a hundred years time that
surprises me that surprises me okay
we've got nine percent saying no it will
not exist so in other words it will
change and then 54 percent sort of on
the fence with maybe but it will be
different
[Music]
you